Most people understand that reality
shows aren't exactly real. But to
dismiss the shows and just say, "Oh,
it's all scripted. It's all fake."
That's not exactly true either. You see,
these shows operate more like human
science experiments than scripted
entertainment. Producers aren't
necessarily telling contestants what to
do, what to say, and how to act, but
going through a series of calculated
behind-the-scenes steps to control the
environment and nearly guarantee chaos
on camera. Unfortunately, because these
tactics are designed to push people past
their breaking point, there have been
countless cases where contestants lives
were tragically cut short, with many
pointing to the mental and emotional
toll these shows have had on them.
Today, we are going to uncover the
step-by-step process reality shows use
to psychologically manipulate their
contestants into getting the
entertainment that they want and all the
ways it has gone horribly wrong. It all
starts with the people they cast in the
first place, whose personality profiles
will naturally clash, ensuring fights
and maximizing drama. Even though
reality shows can have vastly different
premises, most of them follow a similar
structure. Bring a group of strangers
together, isolate them from the outside
world, and then put them through some
kind of challenge with real stakes on
the line. And whether the final prize is
money or love, the production process
for maximizing the entertainment value
of these shows is mostly the same. and a
lot of it relies on morally unethical
behavior. Before the cameras turn on,
reality shows have an extremely
calculated casting process. The first
step for getting on many reality shows
is a lengthy application. And we're not
talking a job application. Shows like
Big Brother require IQ and psychological
evaluations to ensure contestants will
be able to perform under pressure.
Survivor is similar where production
goes through 25,000 initial applicants
complete with background and
psychological screenings before they're
even considered for a call back. One of
the reasons why this process takes so
long is because producers aren't just
looking for good contestants. They're
looking for specific characters. Every
person on the show has to fit a very
specific role. You might have the hero,
the villain, the underdog, the
heartbreaker, the loudmouth, the wild
card. It's like casting for a movie
except the script hasn't been written
yet. And usually the most successful
shows are when everyone plays their role
perfectly. Like in Jersey Shore, Ronnie
was the hothead who wanted to start
fights. Jenny was the female hotad who
wanted to start fights. Snookie was the
lovable mess. Mike the situation was the
arrogant loudmouth. Vinnie was the
laid-back, lovable nice guy. Pauly D was
the uplifting wingman. you knew exactly
what you were going to get from each
character, which made the show easier to
produce, made the stories easier to
write, and fans could easily understand
and develop parasocial relationships
with the cast. However, during the
casting process, what producers are
truly looking for are people that
exhibit characteristics known as the
dark triad. The term dark triad refers
to a trio of negative personality
traits: narcissism, macavelianism, and
psychopathy. Put more simply, they're
looking for those who are entitled, lack
empathy, and manipulate others. Why?
Well, these are the people that create
the best drama. A perfect example is
Russell Hance from Survivor. But first,
a quick word from today's sponsor, Fume.
Flavored Air is quickly becoming the
leading alternative to vaping and
smoking, and today's sponsor, Fume, is
leading the charge. Have you ever caught
yourself reaching for a bad habit
without even thinking about it? Maybe
it's out of stress, boredom, or just
wanting to fit in. Well, that's where
Fume comes in. It's not about quitting,
it's about replacing. Fume offers a
simple and enjoyable way to break away
from bad habits while still having
something satisfying to reach for. Fume
is a flavored air device that delivers
great flavor without any harmful
chemicals. Instead of vapor, you just
breathe in natural, non-toxic flavors
that satisfy the craving. Fume's premium
wooden design feels great in your hand,
and its magnetic top makes for a great
fidget toy. The crisp mint flavor is
great. It's refreshing and keeps you
feeling sharp throughout the day, but
they offer tons of flavor, so there's
something for everyone. Over 500,000
people have already made the switch to
Fume as a part of their habit change
journey. If you're ready to try it for
yourself, now's the time. For a limited
time, if you order the journey pack
using my code Patrick CC, you'll get a
free fume topper, which is an awesome
accessory to level up your experience.
Go to tryfume.com/patrickcc
or scan the QR code on the screen to get
yours today. Despite the show's focus on
strategy and endurance, Russell became
legendary for burning other contestants
socks, sabotaging food supplies, and
lying straight to people's face. He
wasn't just playing the game, he was
thriving on manipulation and control,
and fans love to hate him for it. Some
contestants wear these dark triad traits
like a badge of honor. Tiffany New York
Pard is one of the most iconic reality
stars in history, who was unapologetic
about stirring up drama on VH1's Flavor
of Love.
Not you. You can choke. This was the
first interaction I really had with
Rain. So, I wanted to see her um her
anger level. I wanted to see if I was
powerful enough to twist her mind. It
was a mind thing. She got mind screwed
by me and it worked.
My advice to the other ladies in the
house would be beware of me because I'm
not backing down.
Or take Steven Bear from X on the Beach.
He built a persona around seduction,
betrayal, and exploiting his
relationships for entertainment. But it
turns out this was no persona. This was
actually who he was in real life. Bear
was convicted and jailed for revenge
prawn after leaking explicit footage of
an exartner online. He was sentenced to
21 months in prison. Psychologist Pamela
B. Rutled says that the perfect reality
TV star and the perfect scammer or con
artist have many overlapping traits.
Actors, con artists, and scammers all
tend to exude energy and have excellent
powers of persuasion. The best scammers
can project something desirable and
likable about themselves to increase
perceptions of trust and appear to offer
an opportunity with lots of upside while
glossing over the risks. And to no
surprise, there are literally countless
people who were found guilty of
financial crimes before or after
appearing on reality TV. Jen Shaw from
The Real Housewives of Salt Lake City
was running a telemarketing scam
targeting vulnerable, often elderly
individuals. Shaw pleaded guilty and was
later sentenced to 6 and 1/2 years in
prison and ordered to pay 6.5 million in
restitution. Terresa Judice from the
Real Housewives of New Jersey served 11
months in prison after committing
multiple acts of financial fraud.
Richard Hatch from Survivor was indicted
for fraud and tax evasion. Todd and
Julie Chrysley were found guilty of both
evading taxes and conspiracy to defraud
community banks out of more than $30
million to fund their lavish lifestyle.
Julie and Todd were sentenced to 7 and
12 years in prison. But lucky for them,
another reality star scammer had the
power to personally pardon them. If you
just Google reality star fraud, you'll
get so many different examples that it
actually looks like these producers are
intentionally trying to cast scammers to
be on their show. But show producers
have been criticized for not doing
enough due diligence to avoid
platforming bad or immoral people. Since
they go through a deep vetting process,
they should know about any potential
controversies. Bachelor contestants met
with a private investigator who is quote
trained to dig up any skeletons in the
closet, partly to use for their story
line, but also to get ahead of any
tabloid stories that could come to the
surface if they were on the show. Had
they ever been arrested? Had they ever
sent nude photos to anyone? Had they
ever made an excape? Had they gotten a
DUI? Recently, Love Island cast member
Sierra Ortega was removed from season 7
after posts from years ago resurfaced
showing her using a racial slur that was
historically used to attack Asian
people. Outrage erupted online. She was
labeled a racist and fans demanded that
she be removed from the show. She
announced that she left the show due to
a personal situation and then issued an
apology online.
I had no ill intention when I was using
it, but that's absolutely no excuse
because intent doesn't excuse ignorance.
It just doesn't. Sierra also noted in
her apology that angry fans called ICE
on her family and she posted a slew of
extremely hateful messages and threats
she was receiving. To give you an idea
of the magnitude of Love Island and this
controversy, Sierra's apology video has
over 20 million views. Now, some people
were confused why this was being treated
as a new news story considering she had
publicly addressed and apologized for
the use of this slur before she was ever
on Love Island. And that raised some
conspiracies. Some suggest that
producers knew about this controversy
before the masses did and actively
ignored it. Because if you think about
it, Love Island only benefits from
Sierra's backlash, as her name is
directly tied to the Netflix series. I
think it's safe to assume that when it
comes to a reality TV show, all
publicity is good publicity, right? When
Love is Blind faced similar backlash for
allegedly platforming bad people,
creator Chris Coen defended their
vetting process. We have background
checks and psychological evaluations.
Everyone in the world has a story and we
aren't the police. These shows don't
take accountability for the actions of
their contestants because, well,
realistically, they aren't to blame, but
also because they aren't exactly looking
for the most morally righteous
individuals in the first place.
Producers want a perfect mix of
unpredictable, toxic, and genuine
personalities, which when thrown in a
room together for long enough are
guaranteed to cause chaos and produce
dramatic television. Then again,
producers psychological manipulation
tactics can even have genuine people
behave differently than they normally
would. Sarah Hartzhorn, who was cast on
America's Next Top Model in 2007,
described producers exuding a subtle
tactic. Thousands upon thousands sent in
audition tapes from all over the
country, every single state. We had
casting scouts all over looking for
candidates. And you guys are the ones
who made it. You're here. And it's not
just your looks. You all know that being
a top model is more than that. It's who
you are. and one of you is America's
Next Top Model. This is a
once-ina-lifetime opportunity. By
framing the contestants as chosen and
exceptional, producers create a
heightened sense of purpose and
pressure. It deepens the emotional
investment of the cast, making them more
willing to endure extreme conditions or
humiliation for the sake of not wasting
their once-in-a-lifetime shot. It also
shifts the power dynamic in favor of the
producers. Contestants are no longer
just people. their characters in the
producers story that they feel obligated
to live up to. And before ever stepping
onto the set, contestants are almost
always required to sign strict
contracts, often including detailed
non-disclosure agreements. Now, it's
easy to understand why NDAs are somewhat
necessary to prevent the show's ending
from being spoiled by bitter
contestants, as the episodes were filmed
months in advance, but fans have to wait
week after week to find out what
happens. What they don't realize is
sometimes these contracts come with
threats. Sarah Hearthstone recalls
America's Next Top Model producers
threatening to sue contestants for $5
million if they leaked any information
about the show. The contestants were
shook. They thought, "We don't have $5
million." The producers replied, "We
know you don't. We know all about all of
your financial information. None of you
have $5 million. None of your families
have $5 million either." But the NDAs
can go even further. They can prohibit
contestants from publicly discussing
production conditions, mental health
struggles during filming, and any
manipulative tactics producers use
behind the scenes. Take this viral
Reddit post from a former reality show
contestant for example. The producers
made me go through hell for 4 months. I
lost my house, my car, my business, my
boyfriend. I was very naive and they
exploited me to the point of a mental
breakdown. They use contracts to hold me
hostage in a sense. Gaslit me every day.
I can't even bring myself to discuss
what they did as it's so upsetting to
think of as they used me and I feel so
stupid. I'm now living with my parents
at 40, too afraid to date or work again
and have overwhelming shame. Now, sure,
this could just be a random person on
the internet making this whole thing up.
But this anonymous recount sounds
exactly like the countless personal
stories I will share throughout this
video. So, now that producers have
acquired a perfect cast of clashing
personalities, instilled all of them
with a slight god complex, and prevented
them from revealing any information
about their experience, the next thing
to do is manipulate their surroundings,
restricting their diet, and implementing
borderline torturous tactics to
manufacture chaos. And it all starts
with 24/7 surveillance. As soon as you
wake up in the morning, your mic is put
on. When you go to bed, it's taken off.
On The Bachelor, contestants sign
contracts in which they must agree to be
filmed up to 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. But this may also be by means of
hidden cameras and microphones,
according to the contract, meaning
they're likely going to be caught at
some point in a less than positive
light. They should have no expectation
of privacy. This may seem like an
obvious necessity for reality TV to
function. After all, the only way they
can capture reality is by making sure
literally everything is being filmed and
recorded, right? Sometimes you see a
contestant rip off their microphone and
storm off to essentially protest being
recorded, but the cameras just follow
them anyways and the audience is excited
for more drama. It's a harsh reminder
that they literally can never escape. On
The Bachelor, constant filming is
actually sold as a good part of the
experience. Contestants open up about
things like anxiety, grief, or past
trauma, all while the cameras are
rolling 24/7, turning their real pain
into a part of the show. The audience is
made to believe that all this
surveillance is necessary to show
someone's journey because towards the
end of the show, there is literally a
highlight reel of all of their pain
being broadcast to millions of people.
And the craziest part is the contestants
have no control of how that pain is
edited, manufactured, and presented to
the world. Surveillance is done by the
producers to maintain complete control
over their participants. And this
anonymous Love Island contestant
described the extreme lengths producers
would go to. When you're there, you
don't realize how much you are
controlled by them. If you talk too much
about life outside of the island, the
voice of God, which is like a big
speaker, will tell you to shut up. So,
it's like, "This doesn't make a good
telly." Most of your day is just filled
with gossiping about situations inside
the villa cuz that's all you're allowed
to talk about.
Another former Love Island contestant
described what producers will do to
provoke a situation. They set up the
environment to test you because they
know exactly what you don't like. They
know exactly what you're scared of. They
know what you're attracted to, what
you're not attracted to. They know your
triggers. So, it's very easy for them to
manipulate your environment and
situations to get the best reaction out
of you. And especially when the story
line is not going the way that they
want, they know exactly how to fix that
because they know you very well. You're
literally are just a little rat and
they're experimenting. They're trying to
see what they can change and what they
can do to see how you're going to react
and how far they can push you.
Now, beyond surveillance, one of the
foundational elements of a successful
reality show is keeping the contestants
in pure isolation. In Big Brother,
contestants are confined to a house with
no access to phones, internet,
television, or contact with family and
friends. This isolation forces them to
rely on their relationships within the
house, making every alliance, betrayal,
and argument feel more intense. Former
Bachelor contestant Leslie Hughes said,
"We have nothing. We are completely cut
off from the world. We have to talk to
each other. We have nothing else to do."
Similarly, Love Island isolates
contestants in a luxurious villa where
they have no communication with the
outside world. There are no distractions
and they essentially create this
artificial bubble where everything on
set becomes the only thing that matters
to them.
We didn't have any autonomy at all. Not
only did they take our phones, they took
our wallets, they took our IDs, they
took our passports, all in the same
instance without telling us ahead of
time this was going to happen. And we
were filming 18 to 20 hours a day. The
only time we weren't being filmed was
when the union crews swapped out for a
new crew because they had met their
maximum for the day. You never see
daylight unless you're allowed to use
the bathroom, which is a trailer
outside. They keep you in the state
where you really have no idea how much
time has transpired. It's one of those
things where looking back on it, if
someone told me it was a month, I might
have believed them.
So, what else can they do to cure their
boredom? Well, have you ever noticed
just how much alcohol is being consumed
on reality TV shows? It feels like most
of the explosive moments or juicy drama
erupts after a night of heavy drinking.
Nick Baitman from Big Brother said,
"Alcohol was given to us when we were
feeling down or depressed or nothing was
going on because obviously alcohol is
the molotov cocktail producers used to
liven things up." Baitman says drinks
were coveted by contestants because it
would quell the boredom of being captive
in the house. Brunwin Windham Burke from
the Real Housewives of Orange County
says that producers took it a step
further. Whenever you're filming, they
have alcohol there. They ask you before
you go on a trip, "What kind do you
like?" They get to know what your
favorites are. And while producers don't
force you to drink, alcoholic beverages
were readily available and that
sometimes during scenes, cast members
were discouraged from eating. Jeremy
Hartwell, who was a Love is Blind
contestant, sued the company, alleging
that he could not access food and water,
but alcohol was available and even
encouraged on an empty stomach. Now,
it's one thing to give a bunch of
parters some alcohol, but putting
restrictions on their diet is just
borderline evil. And there's a lot of
evidence that supports this tactic. On
The Bachelor, contestants are not
allowed to eat any food during their
dates because the microphones pick up
the unpleasant sounds. No one looks good
eating and microphones pick up all kinds
of chomping. Now, this seems like a
justifiable reason. And even though it
sounds messed up, in shows like Survivor
or Alone, contestants aren't fed enough
to somewhat mimic the simulated reality
of surviving in the wild. But one could
also theorize that low blood sugar could
prompt emotional reactions, pushing
contestants towards emotional or medical
breakdowns. In Mr. Beast games,
contestants complained about their food
rations. One meal reportedly included a
tiny portion of cold oatmeal, one
hard-boiled egg, and a few pieces of raw
vegetables. They also described going
along stretches without being fed by the
production. There were times when the
production staff gave out small
feastable chocolate bars and filmed some
people eating and praising the candy.
Contestants with food allergies and
dietary restrictions struggled more than
others. Before the competition, people
filled out forms detailing their dietary
needs. An FAQ document was provided to
contestants in advance of the event and
said that all dietary and food
restrictions would be taken into
consideration. However, several
contestants claimed to be served food
they were allergic to and that
alternatives hadn't been provided. We
were treated horribly. A contestant said
they took on this challenge of 2,000
competitors. They should have known they
needed an enormous crew to handle this
correctly. So, now that producers have
trapped and isolated borderline toxic
people who are malnourished and pumped
with alcohol, at the very least, a good
night's sleep would be their last chance
to recalibrate. Well, they don't get
that either because sleep deprivation is
one of the most messed up but crucial
parts of the reality show entertainment
formula.
With feel alive, there's no clocks. What
they was doing was like keeping you up
really late, waking you up early, so
then you're going to react more cuz you
like basically got sleep deprivation.
Most competition reality shows follow a
similar daily routine. Wake up early in
the morning, typically around 7:00 a.m.
Then they go do their competitions or
tasks for the day. Then in the evenings,
they talk strategy or socialize with
another while getting drunk. Now, you
have to keep in mind the producers top
priority is to get 45 minutes of
watchable television each day. They can
count on roughly half of the airtime
coming from the actual competitions or
tasks, but the other half needs to be
the all too sweet drama that everyone
craves. And if the day is coming to an
end and they don't think they have
enough, they will keep the contestants
awake. For three years, Sarah Shapiro
worked as a producer on the reality show
The Bachelor. Her task, as she recalls
it, was to get the contestants to open
up and to give them terrible advice and
to deprive them of sleep. She sees it
now as complicated manipulation through
friendship. In Jeremy Hartwell's lawsuit
against Love is Blind, he said that they
implemented what was called night
dating. We didn't have clocks or
anything, so it's hard to know exactly
when it happened, but typically the
night dates would last until about 2:00
a.m. He estimates that between getting
back to his hotel room at 3:00 a.m. and
being expected in the lobby at 7:15
a.m., he got 2 to 3 hours of sleep a
night. On the challenge, cast members
have reported being kept up until 3 or
4:00 a.m. and then forced into
physically demanding tasks just a few
hours later. On Love Island, lights in
the villa stay on until producers decide
it's time for bed, and contestants are
often woken up abruptly for surprise
challenges. The lights are on the entire
time during Big Brother taping, even
when the contestants are asleep.
Interestingly enough, this is the same
tactic that is used by the toughest
maximum security prison in El Salvador.
Privacy and sleeping with the lights off
is considered a privilege. The modules
are kept lit all day and night for
monitoring. When the sun goes down, the
lights stay on all the time.
They are constantly being observed. I
think this is one of the hardest things.
When they try to sleep, they use their
towels and cover their eyes to block the
light.
And if all this manipulation, control,
pushing contestants to their breaking
point still isn't enough to make a good
show, producers have one final weapon.
They'll rewrite reality itself through a
process known as frankenbiting. Franken
biting is the editing technique reality
TV producers use to reshape a
contestant's words and actions into
whatever storyline they want, even if
it's not what actually happened. Editors
take small clips of dialogue, sometimes
even single words or reactions and
stitch them together to create entirely
new sentences or emotional responses
that never happened in real life. Now, a
lot of the time this seems to be
completely innocuous. Like this clip
from The Bachelor. The girl who says
shut up is spliced into the edit to make
it look like she interrupted Karen.
I know that I may not be everyone's
favorite person.
Shut up.
And I feel like there's like things
going on behind my back or comments or
whispers. And
in that moment in real life when Karen
was talking, Jaime did not interrupt her
and say shut up. That was taken from an
entirely different moment out of
context. And then the women who are
shown laughing after Jaime says shut up
was also clearly taken out of context.
This happens so often in reality TV and
it's extremely clunky to watch. It often
makes me wonder how people get so
invested when you can see that things
are manipulated even for the smallest
reasons. However, sometimes situations
are chopped up so much and narratives
are so distorted that it's shameful
producers got away with it. On season
one of Joe Millionaire in 2003, Sarah
Koser was being portrayed as the bad
girl. Producers set up a scene where
Sarah and Evan go for a walk into the
dark yard where the cameras cannot
capture them. They took audio from Sarah
getting a back massage from another
female castmate hours before and then
put it over a vague panning shot of the
backyard and made it seem like she was
giving Evan top in the woods.
It made it look like she gave him head
in the woods.
But even when Sarah tried to go to the
press after the show was over and
convince everyone that the whole scene
was taken out of context, people around
the world were not convinced.
Let me take a couple of calls. All
right, let's go to Randy. Randy, go
ahead.
Hey, Howard, how are you?
Yeah,
Sarah, let me tell you something. You're
you're making up this whole story about
you were set up. You were in love with
that guy. You were all over him. You
went into the woods. We all heard the
slurpie noise,
right? You know what? I I hate to break
it to you. I just want you to entertain
the possibility that per chance, not
everything you see on television is
exactly moral. Let me tell you,
let me tell you something. Hello. As
soon as you and he didn't pick you and
you heard he didn't have the money, you
were devastated. You're nothing but a
gold digging white trash loser.
Although Sarah Koser handled this
scrutiny from the public with grace,
others fell victim to the immense
backlash. One of the darkest
consequences of reality show editing is
how quickly contestants become targets
for obsessive toxic fandoms, which has
mostly been aimed towards people who
have been labeled as villains on the
show. And to some degree, you can't
blame the fans. After all, they can only
judge a contestant based on what they've
seen on the show. But as we know, these
shows are barely a reflection of who
that person actually is. What makes it
worse is these mass harassment campaigns
often come from fans who believe they're
acting on some kind of moral high
ground. They'll flood a contestant's
social media with hate, send death
threats, and in some cases dig up
private information like addresses or
family details. Olivia Atwood from Love
Island UK opened up about receiving over
3,000 messages a day after her season
aired, many of them telling her she
didn't deserve to live. Another is Big
Brothers Aaron Gre who spoke about how
viewers campaigned for her to lose her
job after producers portrayed her as a
manipulator through selective editing.
But sometimes the harassment doesn't end
with hateful comments. For some
contestants, the public mauling and
emotional toll have pushed them beyond
their breaking point. A stat that
absolutely blew my mind was that at
least 40 people have died on their own
valition after their appearances on
reality TV. Hannah Kima, a female
professional wrestler who was among the
cast of the popular Japanese reality
series Terrace House, died at age 22.
She posted a goodbye message on social
media after receiving a storm of hate
online. Love Island had two contestants
in back-to-back seasons suffer the same
fate. Sophie Graden, aged 32, in 2018,
and Mike Theastis, aged 26, in 2019. The
Bachelor had two women from the same
exact season pass. Alexa Mallister and
Gia Alamand. What if I told you that the
very first person who was ever voted off
a reality show in history also suffered
the same fate? Would that not be a
slight indication of a broken system? In
June 1997, Sisa Sevija became the first
person in the world to ever be voted off
a reality TV competition. The show was
called Expedition Robinson. 4 weeks
after he was voted off, he walked in
front of a train. 9 weeks after that,
the first episode of Expedition Robinson
aired. Anyway, before I started
researching this video, I knew reality
shows were pretty messed up, but I had
no idea just how many tragic losses have
been suffered from former contestants
and the countless other attempts that
have been made. And of course, this fate
is never the result of just one thing.
It's an incredibly complex and deep
decision influenced by countless
factors. But when reality shows follow
the same formula again and again,
calculated casting, 24/7 surveillance,
isolating contestants, restricting their
diet, flooding them with alcohol,
depriving them of sleep, turning them
essentially into controlled robots, and
then putting all of their worst moments
on display to millions of people. It's
easy to see the inherent evil reality TV
needs to have to create the
entertainment. And with so many lives
lost, it starts to make you wonder if
this obviously broken system will ever
change.